Tool to search vachana

technologies

Ruby 2.3.7
Rails 3.2.22
Sqlite
Sunspot Solr

To start solr
bundle exec rake sunspot:solr:start

To reindex Solr
rake sunspot:solr:stop
rm -rvf solr (Delete your /solr directory)
rake sunspot:solr:start
rake sunspot:solr:reindex

== Changes (June 2026)

=== Asset precompilation
- Sass 3.7 removed support for +@import url(...)+. Changed +vachanas.css.scss+ to
  use a +<link>+ tag in +application.html.erb+ for Google Fonts (Noto Sans Kannada)
  instead of +@import url()+.

=== Concord page "Load More"
- Fixed syntax error in +vachana_concord.js.erb+ that prevented the click handler
  from registering.
- Click handler hides button, inserts a +.loading-indicator+, fetches next page via
  AJAX, appends results, removes indicator on completion.
- +.show()+ called after updating href so the button reappears.

=== Search page "Load More"
- +vachanas.js+: Added delegated click handler for +.load-more-vachanas+ (works on
  initial page load, not only inview scroll). Hides button, inserts
  +.loading-indicator+, calls +$.getScript+, removes indicator on completion.
- +_vachana_concord_list.html.erb+: Removed +:remote => true+ and +:disable_with+
  from the load-more link to prevent duplicate AJAX requests.
- +index.js.erb+: Changed +.html()+ to +.append()+ to retain earlier results. Added
  +.show()+ after updating href.

=== Search highlighting
- Removed SearchHighlight call from +index.js.erb+ (AJAX response) because the
  plugin ignored the receiver element and processed +$("body")+, corrupting
  Highcharts SVG.
- Scoped initial SearchHighlight to +.vachanas_load+ in +_vachana_results.html.erb+
  to avoid DOM-wide traversal.

=== Graph click interactivity
- Bar click: Navigates with +&vachanakaara=ID+ using +ids[this.index]+.
- Y-axis labels: Clickable via chart +load+ event — iterates +xAxis[0].ticks+ and
  attaches +onclick+ to each label SVG element, navigating with the vachanakaara ID.
- Label formatter strips hidden +<span>+ (containing ID) and all HTML tags,
  displaying only the clean name.
- Tooltip: Safeguard with +this.category ? this.category.replace(...) : ''+ to
  prevent +undefined+ errors.

=== Performance optimizations
- key_word.rb: Replaced N+1 COUNT per vachanakaara with a single +GROUP BY+ query.
- vachanas_controller.rb: Single-pass letter counting (was iterating vachana texts
  51 times, once per Kannada letter).
- vachanakaaras_controller.rb: Same single-pass fix for the show page letter counting.
- Added database index on +vachanas.vachana+ column (prefix 255) to speed up
  +start_letter+ (LIKE prefix) queries.
- Enabled action caching for +vachanas#index+ with 30-minute expiry, keyed by
  params (memcached via dalli_store).

=== Vachanakaara pagination (show page)
- +show.js.erb+: Now appends to +.vachanas_load+ when +params[:page]+ is present
  (load more), instead of doing a full +.html()+ replace. Replaces +.start_letter_vachana_list+
  only when clicking a letter filter.
- Removed +:remote => true+ and +:disable_with+ from the load-more link to prevent
  duplicate AJAX (the shared +vachanas.js+ click handler manages the request).

=== Vachanakaaras pagination (index page)
- Controller now uses +.paginate(:per_page => 20)+ — was loading all vachanakaaras
  for a letter at once.
- New +_vachanakaara_list_results.html.erb+ partial (just the card loops) for
  appending via AJAX.
- +_vachanakaara_list.html.erb+: Wraps results in +.vachanakaaras_load+ div, adds
  +.load-more-vachanas+ link at the bottom.
- +index.js.erb+: Appends results when +params[:page]+ is present, replaces on
  letter click.

=== AI-powered research search
- New +/vachanas/ai_search+ page with AI-powered research assistant.
- +AiSearchService+ (app/services/ai_search_service.rb): Takes a user's research
  query, finds relevant vachanas via +KeyWord.search_vachana_pada+, sends them as
  context to OpenAI (gpt-4o-mini) for analysis, returns AI-generated insights.
- Requires +OPENAI_API_KEY+ environment variable to be set.
- View displays AI analysis in Kannada + source vachanas with modal popups.
- Accessible at +/vachanas/ai_search+ (no nav bar link — for selected users only).

=== CPU performance review (June 2026)

==== Critical fixes

1. HomeController#index random vachana selection +
   Before: +Vachana.pluck(:id).sample+ loaded ALL vachana IDs into memory (~25k),
   then looped +Vachana.find(rand)+ until a non-blank vachana was found.
   After: Single SQL query with +WHERE vachana != '' ORDER BY RAND() LIMIT 1+.

2. AiSearchService — batched keyword queries +
   Before: Called +KeyWord.search_vachana_pada()+ once per search word (N queries).
   After: Single +KeyWord.where(word: words)+ for exact matches, single +LIKE+ for
   partial matches.

3. VachanasController#index — deferred WordList/Vachanakaara loading +
   Before: +WordList.all+ and +Vachanakaara.all+ loaded on every index request even
   when no search was performed.
   After: Moved inside the search +if+ branch.

4. Vachana.search_vachana_pada — eliminated N+1 COUNT queries +
   Before: Per-vachanakaara COUNT queries + individual +vachana.vachanakaara+ loads
   (3 queries per author in results).
   After: Single +GROUP BY+ for word counts, batched +Vachanakaara.where(id: ...)+
   loaded once.

5. Letter counting moved from Ruby to SQL +
   Before: +pluck(:vachana).compact.each+ loaded all vachana texts into memory for
   letter counting in +vachanas_controller+ and +vachanakaaras_controller+.
   After: +group("LEFT(vachana, 1)").count+ — counting done entirely in SQL.

6. Added database indexes (migration 20260616000000) +
   - +glossaries.word+ (used in +start_letter+, +words_like+ scopes)
   - +word_lists.name+ (used in +find_by_name+)
   - +roles.name+ (used in authorization queries)
   - +review_comments.review_vachana_id+ and +review_comments.user_id+
   - +daily_vachanas.created_at+ (used in date comparison)

7. Enabled Rack::Attack rate limiting +
   Before: All throttling rules were commented out — no protection against abusive
   clients or scrapers consuming CPU.
   After: Enabled 300 req/5min per-IP throttle and login rate limiting.

8. Sunspot/Solr search pagination +
   Before: +@search.results+ returned every matching record without limit.
   After: Added +paginate :page => ..., :per_page => 50+.

9. Vachana.vachanakaara_ids — avoid loading entire association +
   Before: +includes(:vachanakaara).map(&:vachanakaara_id)+ loaded all associated
   records just to extract IDs.
   After: +pluck(:vachanakaara_id).uniq+.

10. KeyWord.vachanakaara_keyword — cached Vachanakaara lookups +
    Before: Called +Vachanakaara.find_by_id+ individually for every keyword's
    vachanakaara_ids (N+1).
    After: In-memory hash cache avoids repeated lookups.

=== Serialized columns migrated to join tables (June 2026)

Summary: Replaced 3 YAML-serialized TEXT columns with proper normalized join tables,
eliminating deserialization overhead on every read and enabling indexed SQL queries.

+--------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------+
| Old column   | Format              | New table           | Rows moved |
+--------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------+
| vachana_ids  | Hash {id => count}  | keyword_vachanas    |    614,293 |
| vachanakaara | Array [id, ...]     | keyword_vachanakaar |    373,544 |
| ids (concord | Array [id, ...]     | concord_items       |    146,253 |
+--------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------+

Files changed: 18 files, +219 / -84 lines. Backups: full MySQL dump (14MB gzip),
raw CSV exports, separate git branch.

Changes made:
- +db/migrate/20260616000001_create_join_tables.rb+ — created three join tables with
  unique composite indexes and foreign key indexes.
- +app/models/keyword_vachana.rb+, +keyword_vachanakaara.rb+, +concord_item.rb+ —
  new ActiveRecord models.
- +app/models/key_word.rb+ — added +has_many+ associations (+keyword_vachanas+,
  +keyword_vachanakaaras+, +linked_vachanas+, +linked_vachanakaaras+). Added helper
  methods (+all_vachana_ids+, +vachanakaara_id_list+, +vachana_id_count_hash+,
  +vachana_count_for+). Refactored +self.vachanas+ class method and
  +self.vachanakaara_keyword+ to use join tables.
- +app/models/concord.rb+ — added +has_many :concord_items+ and +item_id_list+ helper.
- +app/controllers/researches_controller.rb+ — uses +all_vachana_ids+ and
  +keyword_vachanas.count+ instead of +vachana_ids.keys+ and +vachana_ids.count+.
- +app/controllers/vachanas_controller.rb+ — uses +vachana_id_count_hash+ instead of
  +vachana_ids.each+.
- +app/services/ai_search_service.rb+ — uses +all_vachana_ids+ instead of +vachana_ids.keys+.
- +app/views/researches/show.html.erb+ and +_results.html.erb+ — use association counts
  instead of serialized column methods.
- +lib/tasks/keywords.rake+ — all three concordance tasks and the keyword count task now
  write to join tables directly. The +update_keyword_count_in_vachana_priority_1+ task
  uses +keyword_vachanas.create!+ and +keyword_vachanakaaras.create!+ instead of
  manipulating serialized hashes/arrays.
- +lib/tasks/import.rake+ — added +migrate_keyword_join_tables+, +migrate_concord_join_table+,
  and +migrate_all_serialized_data+ rake tasks for future data migrations.

Benefits:
- No YAML deserialization overhead on every read (was parsing TEXT → Hash/Array in Ruby)
- Proper indexing on foreign keys — fast JOINs instead of full-table scans
- Type safety — integers stored as integers, not YAML strings
- Queryable via SQL — can find all keywords for a vachana without scanning every row
- Eliminates duplicate entries (vachanakaara_ids had duplicates from naive << append)
- The +concord.ids+ column was never read by application code — now properly normalized

==== Remaining architectural recommendations

- Install Sidekiq/Delayed Job for CSV/ZIP downloads that currently load all
  records synchronously (+Vachana.download_all+, +Vachana.all_vachanas+).
- Add APM monitoring (New Relic, Scout, or AppSignal) to detect regressions.
- Upgrade from Rails 3.2.22 (EOL June 2016) for Active Job, better caching,
  and security patches.
- Drop old serialized columns (+vachana_ids+, +vachanakaara_ids+, +ids+) after
  verifying the new join tables work correctly in production.

=== Sitemap update (June 2026)

Added missing public pages to the sitemap:
- +/books+ — Internet Archive book search page
- +/vachanas/ai_search+ — AI-powered research page

Regenerated via +scripts/generate_sitemap.rb+ (standalone Ruby script using
Mysql2, bypasses broken Rails console). Output: 5 sitemap files (50K URLs each)
in +public/+, indexed by +public/sitemap-index.xml+. Total: 237,410 URLs.
+robots.txt+ points to +sitemap-index.xml+.

Note: +reference_books+ is admin-only (before_filter), excluded. +activities+
is admin-only, excluded. +books+ table does not exist (it's an Internet Archive
search proxy), but the index page URL is included.

To regenerate periodically:
  $ ruby scripts/generate_sitemap.rb
Then submit +sitemap-index.xml+ to Google Search Console.

=== SEO improvements (June 2026)

Fixes and enhancements to search-engine visibility:

- **BreadcrumbList JSON-LD**: Fixed malformed structured data that had duplicate
  +position: 2+ entries and was missing the Home (position 1) link. Now outputs
  valid +BreadcrumbList+ with correct sequential positions.
- **Article JSON-LD**: Vachana show pages now use +schema.org/Article+ type with
  +headline+, +articleBody+, +author (Person)+, +publisher (Organization)+, and
  +mainEntityOfPage+ — making vachanas eligible for Google rich results.
- **Open Graph image**: Added +og:image+, +og:image:width+, +og:image:height+,
  and +og:image:alt+ tags pointing to +/og-image.png+ for better social sharing.
- **Open Graph locale**: Now dynamically switches between +kn_IN+ and +en_US+
  based on +I18n.locale+ (was hardcoded to kn_IN).
- **Robots meta tag**: Added +<meta name="robots">+ with +index, follow+ and
  +max-image-preview:large+ for optimal crawl control.
- **Hreflang URLs**: Now preserves all query params (+vachana+, +search_type+,
  +vachanakaara+, +id+, +q+) when generating alternate language URLs, ensuring
  correct hreflang annotations on search pages and vachana detail pages.

SEO impact of the serialized columns join table migration: Faster page loads
(no YAML deserialization on every read) improve Core Web Vitals (LCP, FID, CLS),
which are Google ranking signals. The join table indexes replace full-table scans
with indexed JOINs, reducing database CPU and response times.

=== Text-to-Speech (TTS) — listen to vachanas (June 2026)

Summary: Added Kannada text-to-speech playback using the Web Speech API
(+SpeechSynthesisUtterance+) — zero dependencies, zero cost.

Added to all vachana modals across the app:
- Vachana show page (+app/views/vachanas/show.html.erb+)
- Keyword search modals (+app/views/vachanas/_results.html.erb+)
- Concord search modals (+app/views/vachanas/_vachana_concord_results.html.erb+)
- Vachanakaara page vachana modals (+app/views/vachanakaaras/_vachanakaara_vachana_results.html.erb+)
- Full-text search modals (+app/views/vachanas/search_vachana.html.erb+)
- Number search modals (+app/views/vachanas/search_vachana_number.html.erb+)
- AI search source modals (+app/views/vachanas/ai_search.html.erb+)
- Glossary search modals (+app/views/glossaries/search.html.erb+)
- Glossary index modals (+app/views/glossaries/index.html.erb+)

JavaScript in +app/assets/javascripts/vachanas.js+:
- +speakVachana(elementId)+ — reads text from a DOM element and speaks it.
- +speakVachanaText(text)+ — speaks arbitrary text.
- Voice selection: searches for a Kannada voice (+kn+) first, falls back to
  any Indian English voice (+IN+), then any available voice.
- Handles the +voiceschanged+ race condition (voices not loaded at page load
  in Chrome — waits for the event before first utterance).
- Rate: 0.85 (slightly slower than default for better clarity).

Browser support: Chrome, Edge, Safari. Firefox lacks Kannada TTS voices.

Note: Users must have a Kannada TTS voice installed on their system.
- Windows: Settings → Speech → Add voices → Kannada
- macOS: System Settings → Accessibility → Spoken Content → System Voice → Manage Voices

=== User feedback / report incorrect info (June 2026)

Summary: Users can report incorrect vachana or vachanakaara information via an
inline form or modal popup. No login required — optional name/email fields capture
user identity.

Feature:
- +app/models/user_feedback.rb+ — polymorphic model (+Vachana+, +Vachanakaara+)
  with +status+ (pending / reviewed / dismissed), +name+, +email+, +ip_address+,
  +user_agent+ columns.
- +app/controllers/user_feedbacks_controller.rb+ — AJAX +create+ action.
- +app/views/user_feedbacks/_form.html.erb+ — reusable form partial with honeypot
  spam protection (+gotcha+ hidden field). Submits via AJAX; on success hides the
  form and shows a Kannada thank-you message.
- +app/views/vachanas/show.html.erb+ — form rendered at bottom of vachana detail.
- +app/views/vachanakaaras/show.html.erb+ — button in header opens a modal popup
  with the form.
- All vachana modals: feedback toggle button (exclamation-triangle icon) in the
  footer reveals the form inline.

Admin management:
- +GET /feedbacks+ — paginated list with filter tabs (pending/reviewed/dismissed).
- +POST /feedbacks/:id/update+ — mark reviewed or dismiss.
- +POST /feedbacks/:id/destroy+ — delete.
- Admin panel nav bar shows pending count badge.

Spam prevention: honeypot hidden field (silently discards submissions from bots).
If user is logged in, +user_id+ is recorded for audit.

=== vachana_id_count_hash — count column name conflict fix (June 2026)

The +keyword_vachanas+ join table has a +count+ column. Calling +.count+ on
+KeywordVachana+ instances invoked +ActiveRecord::Calculations#count+ (a SQL
+COUNT(*) query) instead of reading the column value. Fixed by aliasing the column
in SQL (+count as cnt+) and accessing via +kv.cnt.to_i+ in +vachana_id_count_hash+.
The +vachana_count_for+ method uses +read_attribute(:count).to_i+ for the same
reason.

Also fixed: +KeywordVachana.pluck(:vachana_id, :count)+ — Rails 3.2's +pluck+
only accepts a single column. Replaced with
+KeywordVachana.where(key_word_id: id).select("vachana_id, count as cnt")+.

== Planned / Recommended Next Features

=== 1. Related Vachanas (using keyword concordance)
Show vachanas that share the most keywords with the currently viewed vachana.
No new data needed -- uses the existing +keyword_vachanas+ join table (614K+ rows).
Helps researchers discover thematic connections algorithmically.

How it works:
- Find all keywords for the current vachana via +keyword_vachanas+
- For each keyword, find sibling vachanas (other vachanas sharing that keyword)
- Rank by number of shared keywords, show top 5-10
- Exclude the current vachana from results

=== 2. Search Autocomplete / Typeahead
Re-enable typeahead suggestions (commented out in +vachanas.js+) for keyword search.
Use the +key_words+ table for lookups. Reduces typing effort and guides users to
valid search terms. Estimated effort: ~1 day.

=== 3. Bookmark / Favorites (localStorage)
Let users save vachanas to a personal list without requiring a login account.
Store vachana IDs in browser +localStorage+ (no database or server-side storage).
Add a "My Saved Vachanas" page at +/vachanas/saved+ that reads from localStorage
and displays the saved list.

=== 4. Recently Viewed Vachanas
Track the last N vachanas a user has viewed (in session or localStorage). Show a
"ಇತ್ತೀಚೆಗೆ ವೀಕ್ಷಿಸಿದ ವಚನಗಳು" section on the homepage or sidebar for easy
back-navigation during research sessions.

=== 5. Per-Vachana Social Share Buttons
Add share buttons (WhatsApp, Twitter, Facebook) to each vachana modal and show page.
Drive organic traffic through social sharing. Low effort -- just icon links with
proper +og:+ meta tags (already in place).

=== 6. Keyboard Shortcuts for Power Users
+'+s'+ for search focus, +'n'+ / +'p'+ for next/previous result, +'Esc'+ to close
modals. Low effort, appreciated by researchers doing repeated searches.

== Related Vachanas Feature (June 2026)

Added "ಸಂಬಂಧಿತ ವಚನಗಳು" (Related Vachanas) to help researchers discover thematic
connections algorithmically.

How it works:
- Finds all keywords linked to the current vachana via +keyword_vachanas+
- Finds other vachanas that share those keywords
- Ranks by number of shared keywords (most shared first)
- Displays top 5-10 related vachanas as clickable links

Where it appears:
- Vachana show page (+app/views/vachanas/show.html.erb+) — top 10 expandable items
- Every vachana modal across the app — top 5 expandable items:
  - Keyword search results (+_results.html.erb+)
  - Alphabetical concord (+_vachana_concord_results.html.erb+)
  - Vachanakaara page (+_vachanakaara_vachana_results.html.erb+)
  - Full-text search (+search_vachana.html.erb+)
  - Number search (+search_vachana_number.html.erb+)
  - AI search source modals (+ai_search.html.erb+)
  - Glossary search/index modals (+glossaries/search.html.erb+, +glossaries/index.html.erb+)

Interaction:
- Clicking a related vachana name expands the full vachana text inline below it
- Expanded text includes a TTS listen button and a "ಮುಂದೆ ಓದಿ →" link (opens detail page in new tab)
- Click again to collapse
- No page navigation — user stays in the current modal or page

Implementation:
- +app/models/vachana.rb+ — +related_vachanas(limit)+ method using SQL +GROUP BY+
  on +keyword_vachanas+ table, ordered by shared keyword count
- Reusable partial (+app/views/vachanas/_related_vachanas_inline.html.erb+) renders
  expandable items; called from all 10 views
- Uses existing +keyword_vachanas+ join table (614K+ rows) — no new data needed
- On click: expands full vachana text inline via jQuery +toggle()+ (no page navigation)
- Graceful fallback: +rescue+ clause in controller ensures show page never errors
  if the join table is unavailable